Daily producer Diana Wynn here. It's
9:00 in the morning. I am at Terminal E
at George Bush Intercontinental Airport
in Houston. There's a line snaking out
the door to get through security.
And we are going to go and talk to some
of these people.
How are you feeling right now?
I was very stressed the last couple of
days. On Monday, I was in security for 5
and 1/2 hours getting literally to this
very point where I was now, and then I
missed my flight. I was here on Monday.
I came on Tuesday and turned the wrong
side. This is my third day trying to
make it home. Oh my gosh.
From The New York Times, I'm Michael
Barbaro.
This is The Daily. My flight's at 2:45.
So, you're giving yourself 5 6
>> 5 hours.
>> On Wednesday, the misery that millions
of travelers have endured over the past
week became official. I'm here 7 hours
before the flight
so that I make it today. According to
the TSA,
security checkpoints at American
airports are now experiencing their
longest wait times in history. Honestly,
the day I had on Monday
was one of the worst travel experiences
I've ever had. There was no water, no
food. It was horrible.
That's not human.
Today,
my colleague Karen De Mercian on what's
led to the stunning delays, and Michael
Gold on the increasingly urgent
negotiations in Congress to bring this
crisis to an end. Is there anyone that
you feel like is responsible for this
situation?
Certainly the politicians. The
government, for sure. Donald Trump. I
think it is a failure of our government.
It's Thursday, March 26th.
Karen, you are based in Washington, D.C.
where it finally seems like these
obscene airport security line wait times
are finally bringing lawmakers to the
negotiating table, which we are going to
talk about with our colleague on Capitol
Hill, Michael Gold, in the second half
of this episode. Let's begin with you
and the misery at these airports and why
it's become so acute over the past few
days and then a few airports, just a
full-blown crisis. Well, in short, you
can't shut down the Department of
Homeland Security indefinitely without
starting to see failures happen in the
system. And when it comes to the TSA,
that's a workforce of 50,000 people who
have been working unpaid for the last
month and a half, basically. They're,
you know, really the the front line of
where we are seeing the effects of that
shutdown play out and are having to
survive this duration that has been
going on for already a month and a half
and have needed to start calling out of
work because they have to find other
sources of income to live in the
interim. And that means you don't have
the same workforce doing the job that is
really important to anybody who's trying
to get on a plane. Now, that breakdown
is not just affecting the individual lay
traveler citizen, it's also started to
affect other government functions.
You saw that in the response to the
accident that happened at LaGuardia
earlier this week, the National
Transportation Safety Board investigates
aviation incidents like this and they
couldn't actually get all their
investigators to LaGuardia because they
got stuck for hours in security lines
and they had to try to wrangle them out
of it. Wow. You've seen the
administration, the Trump
administration, deploy ICE officials,
even though they are not really trained
to be TSA screeners, uh to various
airports around the country. And then in
places like Atlanta, I mean, we we saw
there was a viral social media clip of a
electric violinist entertaining
everybody standing in an interminably
long line.
Which some might have found entertaining
and others might have found that much
more annoying. But this is the scene
that's playing out in both official and
unofficial and comical ways at these
airports across the country as they face
these record long wait times. Right. And
as you said, this really goes back to
a shutdown, a very unique shutdown of a
single agency. And this started, and we
covered it almost every step of the way,
with congressional Democrats seeking to
defund the Department of Homeland
Security in the aftermath of the
immigration crackdowns, especially in
Minneapolis, that killed two US
citizens, Rene Good and Alex Pretly. And
this was never intended to hurt airport
security workers, but
of course the understanding is that it
might, and now it has.
A question I have is why did it take so
long for airports to devolve into this
amount of chaos, given that the
shutdown's been going on for a fairly
long time? Right. Well, the shutdown
started in mid-February, right? And
you're not going to feel the immediate
effect of that because, you know, people
don't get paid for every day's work.
People get paid every 2 weeks or so,
right? And so, the workers for TSA are
on a similar schedule. They're going to
start to feel the pain of it once the
money isn't coming into their bank
accounts. And TSA workers, you're
talking about salaries that are around
$50,000.
You know, that's not a lot of money to
build up savings. And so, what we're
seeing is that these TSA workers are
having to find sources of funding to get
them through life and having to seek out
other gigs here and there. But you know,
they're running out of the ability to
feed their kids in some cases, right?
And so you are seeing a pain on a
personal level happen and them having to
make on an individual basis cost-benefit
analyses of, you know, do I show up for
my job knowing I will eventually get a
paycheck for that once this shutdown
ends or do I find money that I need now?
Happening on a scale of several tens of
thousands of people and it's it's
concentrated in these areas that end up
having more difficult cost-of-living
sorts of situations for more of the TSA
workers than others. Just just explain
that. How in certain areas, certain
regions, and I assume certain airports,
what seem like universal conditions of
unpaid TSA workers is having greater
repercussions. So there's two kind of
factors to think about this. One is what
is your cost of living in the area in
which this airport is, right? JFK, it's
a pretty expensive area, right? And so
when you're talking about bills that are
piling up, those are pretty big bills.
But then think about places like
Houston. Houston's been a persistent
problem with the long security lines.
And Houston, it's a huge huge metro
area. It's like 80 miles across if not
more, right? And so then the question
becomes, well, okay, it's also gas in
the car. It's also hours that I have to
spend on the road not finding other
sources of income to keep my family
going. There's multiple factors that
each TSA worker has to take into account
when they're kind of determining what's
the budget I have to meet in order to
not go into so much debt that I am
risking eviction. And what have you come
to understand about the nature of these
workers
calling in and saying, "I'm not coming
to work." Is this organized in places
like Houston or in New York where cost
of living is expensive?
Or are people just of their own volition
making these financial determinations
and calling in and saying, "I can't come
to work." And it just multiplies on top
of itself? So the union that represents
TSA workers will push back hard against
any sort of suggestion that these are
like organized political statement sort
of call-outs where people are calling in
their absences. And say instead that,
you know, this is just reflecting the
reality of what everybody who's working
in those particular areas that have seen
the longest security lines is having to
go through, which is why you've seen in
places like Houston the number of
call-outs on certain days go up above
40%. And then that is going to translate
directly into pain for the airline
traveler, right? Same sort of thing at
JFK you've seen call-out numbers
consistently go above 30%. That's a
long, long line.
You had mentioned this. President Trump
decides to bring ICE agents in as a
solution to the shortages of TSA workers
calling out.
Help us understand that logic and
whether it's been working. So, the logic
ostensibly is need more bodies, have
more bodies, so send them to help out
the TSA. The problem is that not
everybody believes that's the actual
reason. There's a lot of suspicion that
actually they are there to try to
augment their ability to do
apprehensions and deportations, and the
president did say they were still going
to be performing that role when they
were deployed to airports.
And then the TSA,
at least the, you know, reps in the
union, they really don't like it because
they are basically saying, "Look, these
guys were not trained to do what we do.
The public does not feel comfortable
around an ICE official. The TSA is
actually supposed to make you feel
comfortable when they're doing your
security screenings the same time. And
because they weren't trained to do it,
they can't actually help out in most of
these security lines at all. So, they
stand there passing out water, looking
like they're trying to be engaged, but
not actually, you know, combing through
your bags or getting people through
those metal detectors. And so, what help
are they giving?
And for the TSA, it feels like, you
know, added insult upon injury because
ICE officials are getting paid because
there was this pot of tens of billions
of extra money in last year's domestic
policy bill that has been used to pay
ICE officials, and the TSA workers are
not being paid and still having to then
do the work. Right, there's also the
irony, of course, that this shutdown was
originally about reigning in ICE for the
Democrats who began it, and now the
president is dispatching ICE agents to
the airports to alleviate the pain
points of the shutdown that's supposed
to be about ICE. I mean, exactly. That's
the dramatic irony of all of this,
right? The shutdown that is supposed to
be about ICE does not actually end up
hurting ICE because ICE has backup rainy
day funds that don't actually apply to
any other part of DHS. And the people
that end up getting hurt, the TSA
workers, then end up getting supposedly
bailed out, but maybe not really, by
ICE. And then that becomes a next
political talking point where you have,
you know, the GOP being like, "Look,
they're trying to help. We're trying to
do this." Even though they're trying to
defund ICE, here they are. And Democrats
being like, "Look, they're not doing
anything. This is even more ridiculous
and all the more reason that ICE is, you
know, not deserving the money." And so,
cue the next chapter of the mudslinging.
So, at this precise moment, Wednesday
afternoon, when
ICE agents are at the airports, but not
really able to screen people and speed
things up, what is the precise
situation, and what is DHS and TSA
saying they think things will be looking
like
for the next couple of days or weeks?
Look, the TSA administrator told
lawmakers in testimony on Capitol Hill
Wednesday morning that we're seeing some
of the longest security lines in history
and the longest wait times in history.
>> Wow. And that also, since the start of
the shutdown, 480 TSA workers have quit
their jobs. Now, 480 workers out of the
workforce of 50,000 is not going to make
or break a system, but the problem is
that it takes apparently 4 to 6 months
to train up a new TSA officer. Wow. And
the problem on the horizon is that even
if you had all of those 480 people ready
to hire today,
that won't get them up and running and
fully able to function in all of the
requirements of the job before we have
the first games of the World Cup this
summer when we're expecting a huge
influx of travelers and you know,
hopefully the shutdown gets resolved by
then, but you're going to have a whole
lot more people trying to use the system
and that's going to potentially be
another chapter of this problem even if
we're not in the shutdown at that point.
Right. 480 TSA workers leaving could
turn into a lot more than that and the
number of people calling out could reach
astronomical percentages of the folks at
various airports.
So, the number to pay attention to is
really the call outs number. If that
keeps increasing
higher than, you know, the 40% level,
um, 50% level at some of these airports
or if you start to see numbers like that
at many, many more airports across the
country,
we are going to see how much stress this
is fragile system can actually take.
There have already been warnings by top
Trump administration officials that, you
know, smaller airports could have to
close if things get much worse. And
certainly there's always the option that
those lines can get even longer. How
deep and how far we get into that
potential system breakdown though really
depends on whether Congress can come to
an agreement sooner rather than later.
O'Hare, thank you very much. We
appreciate it. Thank you.
After the break, congressional
correspondent Michael Gold on whether or
not it looks like Congress can come to
an agreement to end this crisis.
We'll be right back.
>> Mr. Gold, welcome back. Thank you for
having me. You are on Capitol Hill. I
am. Yes, I'm on Capitol Hill. A likely
place for me to be.
A congressional reporter in Congress.
Well, you're actually there covering
the negotiations trying to end this
crisis at America's airports, which I
have to imagine are quite complicated
because the shutdown at the center of
this entire ordeal wasn't about
airports. It was about reforming ICE, as
we talked about with Karen, but now it's
become about airports. So, everyone's
political incentives, I have to imagine
on both sides of the aisle, are not
really the same here.
I think that's a good way to frame it.
This was not a shutdown about the TSA.
This was not a shutdown about America's
airports.
When this started, everyone knew that
the airports would likely be affected at
some point, but Democrats were really
resolute that this was about immigration
enforcement, and they don't want to come
to a deal that doesn't address their
concern that federal immigration agents
are out of control. They need to be
reined in, and that there needs to be
legislation that can address what
Democrats see as abuses by the system.
And Republicans still maintain that
Democrats are asking for too much, and
that it's time to do something about
what's going on at the airports. Look at
these TSA agents who have not been paid
for weeks, and they say it's time for us
to do something about this. Mhm. And I
think as we've seen these lines get out
of control in airports across the
country, a lot of Democrats are looking
at this too and saying, "Okay, the
pressure's on. It's time for us to reach
a deal. Let's see if we can come
together and and make something happen."
And so, you're seeing these
negotiations, which had been kind of
happening at a snail's pace for the last
few weeks, really start to pick up
steam. Okay, well what does that
actually
mean for snail's pace negotiations that
achieved seemingly nothing over the past
6 weeks to suddenly
pick up steam? What do What did you
learn? Yeah, I want to be careful here
and I should say it's Wednesday
afternoon as we're talking and as is
often the case with any negotiations in
Congress, they're both very loud and
very fragile at the same time. So, just
let's just start from that baseline when
we talk about what's going on, but Fair.
we really saw a lot of movement toward a
deal and I think it makes sense to start
with last week when Tom Homan, who's the
White House border czar, came to Capitol
Hill to meet with a bipartisan group of
senators and talk about a way to end the
crisis.
This is the first time that that Homan
came since Trump put him in charge of
immigration in Minneapolis and it was a
real sign to senators and to those of us
who watched them that the White House is
ready to find a way to bring an end to
this whole situation. So, Homan comes
and he sends a letter to two Senate
Republicans saying, "We're open to
making some changes on immigration
enforcement and some changes to the way
that ICE operates." Basically, we're
unwilling to give some ground to the
Democrats on the big animating issues
behind this shutdown.
Yeah, he says there are some points that
we can agree on. There's some stuff that
we're ready to discuss and let's come
together and find a path out of this
crisis and find a way forward. And we
head into the weekend, Republicans come
forward and they have a proposal which
they bring to the White House and they
say this is what we want to do.
We're going to fund all of the
Department of Homeland Security except
for the parts of ICE that deal with
immigration detentions and deportations.
Well, we should say that that's a that's
a pretty big concession to Democrats.
It's a huge concession to Democrats
because Democrats have said from the
get-go that they did not want to pass a
bill that funds ICE. I mean, this was
like their main point. They didn't want
to fund ICE without these new
restrictions on federal agents and
Republicans are coming out and saying,
"Okay, we will pass a bill that does
that. We'll fund everything except the
parts of this department that you don't
want to fund."
>> Right. Potential breakthrough. It is a
potential breakthrough. So, they bring
that deal to the White House, that
proposal, and it gets to President
Trump, and he completely rejects it.
President says, "I don't want to make a
deal that doesn't fund ICE." And he goes
a step further and says, "I don't want
any deal that you guys pass unless you
also take up this separate bill, the
Save America Act, which puts
restrictions on voting and requires
voter ID." Right, which you were on the
show talking about, I think, a week or
so ago, and which has, we should say,
nothing to do with the DHS shutdown or
TSA lines or ICE.
Right. That's correct. And if you were
listening last week, you would know that
the Senate has been basically debating
this for a while, and this has been
their main focus, but they've also been
trying to get this deal done. And this
is the first time that the president has
come out and linked these two objectives
together. Huh. So, that brings us to
Monday morning, and negotiations are
frozen. And that is when Trump decides
to send ICE agents to the airports to
help out the TSA, relieve the long
lines, try and relieve the officers of
all this work they're doing.
And Democrats are a bit confused because
to them,
they now see Trump reminding everybody
that this crisis at the airports was all
about ICE to begin with. Right. And then
there's one other thing that I think is
really important. John Thune, the Senate
Majority Leader, has said to the
senators, "Hey, I know you guys thought
that you would be leaving on Friday for
a 2-week recess. If we can't get a deal
done to get us out of this crisis,
you might have to stay here until we
do." Mhm. And senators are just like us.
They like their weekends, and they like
their breaks, and they like to go home.
And so, now there's all this pressure to
make a deal at the same time that Trump
has basically said, "Don't make a deal."
>> Right. Yeah, so with all of this going
on, a group of senators who are pretty
closely aligned with the president, uh
people like Senator Katie Britt from
Alabama and Bernie Moreno of Ohio, uh
Lindsey Graham, they go to the White
House on Monday
to try and convince the president that
he should be more open to this deal that
they've pitched. Mhm. And they managed
to convince him to at least hear them
out. And so now things are back on. And
while that sounds really positive, as of
right now,
I just want to be clear, the two sides
are still really far apart. Republicans
sent a deal, like they said, we're going
to find everything except for
immigration enforcement, but that deal
doesn't have any of the new restrictions
that Democrats said that they needed in
order to agree to fund the rest of the
department. And so Democrats sent their
version of the deal,
which doesn't actually look that
different from the first version that
they sent 5 weeks ago when we started
this. It has all their demands on
immigration enforcement, it has all
these requests that they've made of the
White House and things that they said
the White House already agreed to that
Republicans are suddenly pulling from
their offer.
So right now, we're in the middle of a
heated negotiation with a lot of back
and forth. And I think when you're
talking about Congress, it's kind of
important to remember two things.
There's the paper, there's the text,
there's the thing that's being
exchanged,
and then for lack of a better word,
there's the vibes.
>> Mhm. And so right now, both sides are
saying, "Well, we don't really have a
deal. They're not agreeing. They're not
agreeing." But the energy around here is
that everybody is really trying to find
a way out of this. And it looks like
they're going to move closer. It's just
a matter of how long it takes.
I I just want to zero in on what the
proposed deal from Republicans would
mean if Democrats decide to get behind
it. And it it's not certain that they
will, but let's just presume for a
minute that ultimately the pain of the
airport situation gets to be such that
they do.
It would really mean that Democrats
have to agree to fund DHS
while not funding ICE.
And while that might seem like a
concession to them, it doesn't get them
the really specific reforms they've
demanded from ICE. And maybe they're
worth repeating here. For example, ICE
agents
must show a warrant where they show up.
They must no longer wear masks. They
must
identify themselves.
And
it doesn't seem like the Republican plan
to fund everything in DHS but ICE would
really delineate any of those reforms.
So, it would ask Democrats
to kind of give up the entire purpose of
this agency shutdown and the leverage
that they have to ever get these
reforms.
Yes, the argument that Democrats made
when they saw that Republican offer is
that it did not do anything they'd asked
for. And that if they agreed to it, they
would on the one hand not be voting to
fund ICE, which is very important to
them. But on the other hand, they
wouldn't have gotten anything out of
this back-and-forth negotiation. And
there is a concern,
mostly expressed privately, that if you
fund the TSA and the Coast Guard and all
these other agencies, Republicans will
never have any incentive to agree to any
of these reforms on ICE. Because there
won't be any reason for them to do it.
Because the Republicans, as you might
remember, last year gave ICE billions of
dollars in their big beautiful bill that
ICE is using to continue doing what it's
been doing anyway. Right. Carin
mentioned that ICE is reasonably well
funded from that domestic spending bill
as it is. ICE has a lot of big beautiful
money.
And that's why they've been able to keep
operating. And so, Democrats are worried
that if they agree to this deal, they're
not getting anything. And that they've
spent the last five or six weeks holding
up TSA and accomplish nothing.
But on the other hand, Michael, and I'm
I'm curious what you would say to this
and what Democrats in Congress would say
to this,
a case can be made that in the period
since the Department of Homeland
Security shutdown started, a lot has
changed
inside DHS and inside ICE.
Tom Homan, who you just mentioned, he
drew down a lot of the agents from
Minneapolis, and the overall intensity
of street enforcement around the country
by ICE agents has really abated, and we
saw the Secretary of Homeland Security,
Kirstjen Nielsen, who's really the face
of ICE's most aggressive tactics, got
ousted, and her replacement,
Mark Morgan Mullen, seems more open to
reforms, at least according to what he
said in his confirmation hearings. So,
you could argue, and I wonder if some
Democrats do, that the shutdown did do a
fair bit of what Democrats overall want
to see in the direction of immigration
enforcement. I think for Democrats who
may ultimately agree to a deal, the
direction that things have been going
will be a big part of that. For example,
when Secretary Mullen was at his
confirmation hearing, he said, "Yes, I
would want to require
ICE agents to get warrants when they're
entering private homes." That was a big
deal for Democrats, and it was something
the White House hadn't yet conceded. And
I think there were a lot of Democrats
who saw that as a sign that things were
going to change with ICE, and that
things were going to change with the
Department of Homeland Security. And so,
even if they don't get everything that
they're requesting, I think a lot of
Democrats feel like they successfully
drew attention to a major issue, and
they were able to extract some
concessions. The flip side of that is
there are a lot of Democrats who look at
the Trump administration and say, "If we
want anything concrete, we need it to be
law, because things could change at any
moment." So, if you had to crystal ball
this for the next week or so,
as
lines at airports get even longer
because the TSA workers aren't being
paid, as perhaps more TSA workers than
the 480 who have already left quit their
job, and as senators and House members
don't get to go home for this 2-week
break that they all want, do you suspect
that some deal is going to get reached
along the lines of what we're talking
about here pretty soon, or could this
actually all blow up in this crisis just
get worse and worse?
My answer to that is yes and yes. I
think we are in a delicate situation
here.
As much as the Senate's going to
continue negotiating and there is an
incentive for senators to reach a deal
both so that TSA agents get paid and so
they can leave Washington.
There are a few factors that are going
to make that complicated and I would say
that none of those factors are more
complicated than the president himself
because ultimately you need President
Trump to buy into any deal.
The Senate's not going to want to move
if the White House isn't okay with it.
And frankly,
any deal the Senate reaches also has to
be passed by the House where Republicans
have a very very narrow majority and
where the president's arm-twisting
essentially has been really necessary to
get bills like this across the finish
line.
So on the one hand, yes, it's feeling
positive. There seems to be a lot of
energy here. Everyone feels really good.
On the other hand, we've seen
negotiations fall apart for any number
of reasons here. I've been here a year
and it's happened countless times. So I
don't want to predict soon or not soon.
But it's hard to imagine that Congress
is going to see continued chaos at
airports, people waiting 5 hours and
missing their flights. It's hard to
imagine they're going to look around and
want to be the ones who are holding the
bag for the complete collapse of
American air travel.
Oh Michael, as always, thank you very
much. Anytime, Michael.
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
In a landmark verdict, a jury found that
YouTube and Meta, the parent company of
Facebook, harmed a young user with
design features that were addictive and
that led to the deterioration of her
mental health.
The case was brought by a now
20-year-old woman who accused the social
media companies of creating products and
features, such as infinite scroll, that
are as dangerous as cigarettes.
The verdict, which both companies are
likely to appeal, validates a novel
legal theory outlined in a recent
episode of The Daily that social media
companies and apps can cause personal
injury.
And Iran has dismissed President Trump's
proposal for a ceasefire that would end
the war.
A military spokesman insisted that the
conflict would end
only on Iran's terms.
Today's episode was produced by Michael
Simon Johnson, Shannon Lin, Lexi Diao,
Diana Wynn, and Alex Stern.
It was edited by Brendan Klinkenberg,
contains music by Mary LaDonna.
Our theme music is by Wonderly.
This episode was engineered by Chris
Wood.
That's it for The Daily. I'm Michael
Barbaro.
See you tomorrow.